Chapter 9

Return to Mountshannon

Tony Muggivan

Brendan was released from Dundrum in the spring of 1991 —Ithink it was March. He was now seventeen years of age.
Whenever he was released, I kept a loaded shot gun in bed with me at night. My wife was afraid I would shoot her but she never insisted I put the gun away.
One day, he came and told me he wanted to park a caravan. He said a friend of his, Fr Neylon, had bought a caravan for him. I showed him where he could park it.
Within a very short time, two strange young men visited him. I drove past on the tractor and saw Brendan and the men. Brendan had a slash hook in his hands. I thought he was
cutting wood for the fire. He later told me that the men had followed him from prison and had come to beat him up but he had held them off with the slash hook.

He asked me to call the health board to see if he could get a better caravan when it began to leak. I phoned and was referred to the Clare County Council. An inspector came to visit and look over
the caravan. She seemed to think I could do more for him. She also said that there were people in worse conditions.

I believe that, at this time, Brendan was getting money from the health board every week. He had to go five miles to Scariff to pick it up.

I watched him as closely as I could throughout the year 1991. He did make an effort to improve. He bought a solid-wood stove for the caravan, as it was very cold. I told him he could cut all the
firewood he wanted. He paid twenty-five pounds for the stove, which showed that he was able to save money.

He was getting his food from Sonny and Ann Farrell. One day, Sonny asked him to cut some firewood for him. Brendan refused and Sonny called him a lazy bastard. Brendan then told Sonny
that he would ‘get’ him, and that ended their friendship.

Brendan used to dress up on Friday evenings and leave the village, heading in the direction of Scariff, and I wouldn’t see him again till the following Monday or Tuesday. My son, Brendan, and
his friend, Mick Starr, were in the hotel in Mountshannon and Mick’s leather jacket was stolen. They told me about it on the following Sunday. I told them not to confront Brendan — that it was
easy to push in the door of the caravan when he was not there. They did, and got the jacket back. Brendan never said anything about the jacket or what happened to it.

He continued to be very neat and clean in the way he dressed. However, the area around his caravan began to get filthy. He would throw out milk bottles and old papers and would never pick

them up. One day, he asked me could he move the caravan into the trees where it would be hidden from view. He was afraid to be too near the road.


He called my brother, Tom Muggivan, and asked him about the use of his house. Tom owns a house near where he had his caravan. Tom told him that he would not be able to let him have the
use of the house.

Brendan argued that he would be available to keep the house from being broken into, or even burned. Tom worried that Brendan was issuing a veiled threat that the house might be harmed if
his request was rejected. However, Tom insisted, with pressure from his family, that he would not allow anyone to use the house.

Brendan later moved to a camping ground but was unhappy there. Three fishing rods were reported missing. He later moved into Fahys’ house in Whitegate and I didn’t see much of him after
that. As discussed earlier, he told me that a guard had told him that I had set him up to be arrested by having him stay at my house and arranging for the guards to come and arrest him.

There were some hopeful signs that Brendan might settle down but it appeared unlikely that he would be able to get or hold stable employment.

JJ collected additional information on this phase of Brendan’s life. What follows is what he wrote:

Denis Woods tried on several occasions to persuade him to settle down and he helped him as much as he could. He was driven part of the way to Ennis on one occasion by a friend of Denis
Woods after he had agreed to enroll in a trade school. He was dropped off in Tulla having told the driver that he would hitch-hike the rest of the way.

The driver drove back toward Mountshannon but stopped on the way in Scariff to get groceries. When she arrived in Scariff, one of the first persons she saw on the street was Brendan. He
had, apparently, hitched a ride back to Scariff, instead of going on to Ennis, immediately after being dropped off in Tulla.

On another occasion, Denis tried to get him engaged in some work on his farm, driving fence posts around an area where he had collected his hay for the cattle for the winter. The work
required that stakes be driven into the ground for the wire which would be strung around the area to keep cattle out. Denis Woods was aware that Brendan O’Donnell was a reluctant worker
but he nevertheless tried to get him to work.

Shortly after starting the work, Denis heard the handle of the axe being used by Brendan cracking. Brendan immediately reported that he could not now work since he had no instrument

to work with. He appeared very disappointed when Denis Woods made another handle for the axe and told Brendan that he could now continue working.

From 1991 to 1992, Brendan continued to move from place to place. It was reported that he committed a number of break-ins during this time. He was charged with some of them.

He was usually able to find people to help him. He was given food, allowed to take showers, and allowed to do his laundry. During this time, he had little trouble hitching lifts on the roads. He
travelled back and forth between friends’ houses and, frequently, travelled back and forth between his grandmother’s home in Eyrecourt and Whitegate and Mountshannon. He could be an interesting conversationalist. He would regularly visit Dinans in Derrycon and be given meals. He sometimes spent hours in conversation.

Brendan stole a boat cover to put over his caravan to stop the leaking. I asked the owner of the boat cover and the guards not to follow him up for stealing the cover as I feared he would come

after the owner at a later date.

An elderly man, Willie Keane, was beaten up one night while returning home from the village. He was badly beaten and had to be hospitalised for a number of days. I later found out that Willie
Keane had ordered Brendan out of his hay shed. Brendan had been sleeping in the shed at night.

Around this time, he robbed the late Mr Smythe and stole his car. I had a conversation with Mr Smythe and he told me that he could have shot Brendan but he felt sorry for him and gave him
about eighty pounds. Brendan took his car and it was later found in a lake in County Galway.
