Chapter 12

Return from England

JJ Muggivan

Brendan returned from England shortly after being released from jail on 25 March 1994. He came into Ireland through Belfast and hitched rides from Belfast to the Eyrecourt area.

He was not supposed to leave England as he was on probation until the end of his sentence. He came through Belfast to avoid any greater scrutiny there might have been had he

returned home through another entry point, such as Dublin or Cork in the Republic of Ireland.

He went to his grandmother’s in Eyrecourt after arriving. Members of the Quinn family did not want him living with Mary Quinn as they believed him to be dangerous. Because of
this, he had to hide from the relatives when he stayed with his grandmother. If there was danger of his being seen by a relative, he would leave and stay where-ever he could until it was safe to
return.

While in Eyrecourt, he told his uncle, Michael Quinn (his mother’s brother), about his problems with the law and how he was in danger of being arrested if he wasn’t careful. Michael Quinn
didn’t want Brendan staying with his parents (Brendan’s grandparents) and made this known to him. He told Brendan to give himself up to the guards and to stop running from them. Brendan
told him that he would think about it. However, he seemed to get suspicious that his uncle would turn him in to the guards. He felt it was no longer safe for him to be in Eyrecourt and he asked his
uncle to drive him to Mountshannon.

Brendan was seen by several people shortly after arriving in the Mountshannon and Whitegate area. He set up a ‘home’ in Cregg Forest, near his original home in Cregg Wood. It is likely that he
used plastic covering or bales of hay as covering at night. Years earlier, Tony had asked him how he kept warm at night when he slept outdoors. He told him that a good way to keep warm was to

wrap onself up in plastic since it was air- and waterproof and would keep in the heat and keep out the damp. Tony wrote of where Brendan was staying:

I believe his ‘home’ was about a quarter of a mile into Cregg Forest from Cregg Cross. After the tragedy of the following weeks, I noticed a mirror placed in a tree where the lights from a car
entering the same area would flash. By checking the angle of the mirror, I believe I located the exact place where he was staying. It was at this location I later found a sock which I believe I had

seen Imelda Riney wearing.


Shortly after arriving, Brendan made contact with Ms Mae Tuohy, the local postwoman. Mae Tuohy was well acquainted with the O’Donnell family and had befriended Brendan many times
when he was growing up. She was again willing to help him since she knew he had no job and probably had no money.

Mae Tuohy brought Brendan groceries on a number of occasions, meeting him near what is known as ‘The Mill’. ‘The Mill’ is located about one mile from his original family home and close to
the part of Cregg Forest where Brendan now had his ‘home’. Mae Tuohy would usually bring him the groceries at around four o’clock in the afternoon. Tony recalled seeing Brendan around this

time:

Not long after Brendan arrived back from England, in about the middle of April 1994, I was having a conversation with a friend of his, Paddy Bugler, when Brendan passed us in a fairly new
car. Paddy Bugler commented that he would be willing to bet that the car was not a car he had purchased.

I was surprised to discover that Brendan was again in the area and was even more surprised that he had not come to visit me. I was aware that Brendan would not stop to talk to me while
he was in the car he was driving because he would feel that he would have to explain to me where he had got it.

My wife and I were preparing to make a trip to Cologne in Germany, to visit some friends. I called JJ in New Orleans and we discussed our fears about Brendan being back in the area and the
likelihood that he had already stolen a car.

JJ warned me to make sure that all of my guns were safely hidden before we left for Germany. I told him that I had already hidden the guns and that I had hidden the ammunition ina
different location. We agreed that all members of the family should be warned not to be alone with him, not to pick him up on the road if they were alone in the car, and to be alert for danger
signs should they come in contact with him.

I owned a three-shot, semi-automatic shotgun. Brendan was familiar with this gun, and this caused me to be more aware of the need for caution.

During this month, it was reported that Brendan was driving a car on the Shannon road in Mountshannon when he saw his father working with some other council men. He reportedly
attempted to run over his father with the car, but his father managed to jump out of the way before being hit. I heard a report that Brendan was seen laughing as he drove away.

While in Germany, I called my brother numerous times to discuss my worries. We both agreed that it would be useless to contact the guards until some crime had been committed.

Some time later, and about two or three weeks after his arrival in the area, Brendan stopped showing up for his meetings with Mae Tuohy. He had apparently found another source of food.

A few weeks after setting up tent in Cregg Forest, Brendan seems to have gone looking for an empty house instead. On Thursday evening, 20 April, he went by his grand-uncle’s house near the
old house where he had previously stayed. The old house was that previously owned by Willie Gleeson from Limerick. It had been used by Willie Gleeson as a holiday home, so most of the time it
was empty.

While talking to his grand-uncle, Brendan noticed smoke coming out of the chimney of the old house and he asked his uncle who was living there now. Son O’Donnell told him that Imelda
Riney lived there with her two children. He told him not to bother the woman and her children and to find somewhere else to live. Brendan, however, made contact with Imelda Riney, and seems

to have asked her for help.