Chapter 14

The Killing of Imelda and Liam Riney — A Reconstruction

JJ Muggivan

Imelda Riney awoke early. She knew that Brendan would be coming to the house after Val Ballance, her ex-husband, picked up their older son, Oisin, to take him to school. She hoped that
she would be finished with Brendan today.

She hoped that he had made contact with Tony and that Tony had helped him. She was scared to think of anything else. She was frightened by his talk of robbing the post office in
Whitegate, and having her help him.

She did not know how he might act if she refused to help him, although she was sure that she could not, and would not, help him commit a robbery. He had told her a few days earlier that he
would like to have Tony’s automatic gun. She hoped against hope that he had not succeeded in stealing it.

She knew that Tony would not give him a gun but, instead, would think of a way to help him. Imelda decided that if Tony helped Brendan with money, she would be willing to drive him to Cork
to help him begin his journey to France. She would even promise to follow him later if this would get rid of the more immediate danger.

Soon after she got up, Imelda Riney noticed that Val Ballance was already up. He had been around for the past few days and was helping her with the children. It was about 7.30 or 8.00. Val
prepared breakfast and he and the two children ate. Imelda usually didn’t eat breakfast. She helped get Oisin ready for school and, when everyone had finished breakfast, she said goodbye to Val
and Oisin, Val brought Oisin to a neighbour who would give him a lift to school.

Imelda told Val that she would come over to the school in Tuamgraney later in the day and bring lunch with her. This was the last time Val and Oisin saw her and Liam alive.

She went back into the house with Liam and began nervously cleaning up after breakfast. She was talking to Liam. She had been anxious that he would begin talking about Brendan. He had
begun to call him Ben although he had initially been nervous around him.

A few hours later — at about 10.30 — she heard sounds outside, followed by a knock on the door. She knew who it was but she had to answer. She had feared that Brendan might be waiting
outside until he was sure that Val had left with Oisin.

She opened the door and saw Brendan standing there with a rifle.


He attempted to come inside with the gun. In her shock, she shouted at him to leave the gun outside, that she would not allow a gun in her house. He told her they had to go ahead with the post
office robbery.

He left the gun outside and came in. She tried to argue with him.

He would not be persuaded and told her that they had very little time. The van bringing the money from Scariff Post Office to Whitegate Post Office had passed a couple of hours previously.
The longer they waited, the less cash would be left in the post office. The garda escort had already returned to Scariff and there would be no guard around.

Imelda was panicking and desperately trying to stop Brendan from going ahead with his plans. He was speaking intensely and urgently. The money was delivered in cash and, not long after
delivery, most of the cash would be picked up by the pensioners and others who received money.

She became just as insistent that she could not help him but tried to settle him down by offering to make him some tea and prepare a breakfast. She put water in the kettle and started the gas
fire. Brendan began to become irate and shouted at her to get the child ready and to get in the car.

He retrieved the rifle and threatened her and the child if they would not do as ordered.

She tried to slow him down but he demanded sex. They went upstairs. Brendan would state at his trial that Imelda consented to sex. Her family, however, insists that she would never have
consented.

Fear now consumed her, mostly for her child. Brendan had no intentions of giving up on his plans to rob the post office. Imelda tried not to show her fear in order to keep the child from becoming frightened. She put on Liam’s blue wellingtons and his coat. She put on her own coat and took her son to the car. Brendan was walking behind her, hiding the rifle inside his jacket.

He ordered her to drive into the village of Whitegate. The post office is near the end of the street where they entered the village. He told her that she was to park outside while he went in and
held up everyone in the post office and got the money. He tried to reassure her by telling her that she could always say he made her help him.

She was driving with Liam sitting beside her and Brendan in the back seat with the rifle. She drove as slowly as she could, trying to postpone everything for as long as she could.

Brendan saw from her actions that he could not trust her to stay outside in the car while he committed the robbery. He considered taking the keys with him while doing the robbery but realised that she would probably run for help with the child. If she got the word out, he would not be able to get very far before there would be a garda chase.

He tried to explain to her that there would be no danger to her and the child. He told her that the robbery would take a few minutes and that they would then go to Cork by driving north to
Portumna, then across the Shannon into Tipperary, and then down the Tipperary side of the Shannon through Limerick and into Cork. He said that the guards would never figure out that this was
their escape route.

She was adamant, in spite of her fear. He began cursing and swearing at her for not cooperating. He ducked down in the back seat whenever he saw a car passing.

Brendan finally told Imelda to drive past the post office, having realised that he could not make her follow his orders, even at the point of the gun.

Mae Tuohy had already delivered the money to the post office and started delivering the post to her route. She recognised Imelda’s car coming towards her as she was getting ready to leave
Whitegate. She saw Imelda making strange faces as she passed. It seemed that she was trying to signal that something was wrong. She could not understand what she was signalling.

Imelda reduced the speed of the car, hoping that Mae Tuohy would suspect that something was wrong. Mae Tuohy was surprised that Imelda did not stop to pick up her post. She saw the shape

of someone in the back seat. Before the car sped away, Mae Tuohy was able to make out the features of someone resembling Brendan.

eH


On Friday afternoon, Val Ballance returned to the house with Oisin, wondering why Imelda had not met him at the school for lunch. He saw that her Ford Fiesta was not parked in its usual place
and wondered where she and Liam might be. He went into the house and found that they were not there.

The kettle was on the stove, the gas fire was on, and all of the water had boiled away. Val was also surprised that Imelda had left her tobacco pouch at the house as she always took it with her.
He phoned two of Imelda’s sisters who lived in Clare, to find out if they had heard from her.

On Saturday, Val Ballance became more concerned for Imelda and Liam. On Sunday, he went to the guards in Scariff and reported that they were missing.

eH

Imelda drove erratically towards Woodford. When she got close to Woodford, she saw a woman and tried to signal to her for help. With Brendan in the back seat, she slowed down and moved her
face as close to the windscreen as she could. She knew that she had drawn the attention of the woman driver coming towards her. She mouthed some words but could not talk.

Brendan saw what she was doing and shouted at her to speed up and not to try to give him away. He was afraid that she was about to stop the car, but he managed to scare her into continuing
to drive and into speeding up.

In Woodford, he told her to drive towards Eyrecourt. They went through Portumna. Brendan was getting more agitated and confused because people seemed to have noticed that something
was wrong. Near Eyrecourt, he became sure that a man saw them and felt that there was something strange. Liam was crying. Brendan could not prevent Imelda from trying to give signals to
passing cars every chance she got.

He shouted at her to begin driving back to Cregg. He was now desperate. He complained that it was too late to go back and rob the post office, as most of the money would already have been
picked up.

He complained that Imelda might have drawn enough attention to cause the guards to be called. He said that she had put him danger of spending years in jail, by not helping him to rob the
post office.

For several hours, he made her drive around randomly as he kept changing his mind. He appeared to be getting waves of fear, talking incessantly about how the guards would soon be closing
in. They stopped on the way to Cregg Wood to get groceries — especially, to get food for the child who was now crying a lot.

When they got close to Cregg, Brendan ordered Imelda to drive in the forest road. He wanted the car off the road as soon as possible. He believed that he had been seen by Mae Tuohy, and that
she had recognised the car. He wanted to use a more secondary road as soon as possible but found the first road off the primary forest road blocked.

The second road was open and he ordered Imelda to take the left turn. She drove a few hundred feet and then he told her to stop the car and get out with Liam. Brendan was now very frightened and seemed to be unable to stop talking.

She noticed the strange expressions on his face and knew that she was dealing with someone very dangerous and irrational. She tried to appease him but nothing would work.

Brendan ordered her to start walking into the wood with Liam. Sometimes Liam walked and sometimes she carried him. After walking for a long time, she wondered where they were going
but she realised that Brendan was not sure either. He was now scared to release his hostages, believing that Imelda would do what his sister had done when she had escaped from him from the
bedroom. After all, that was what had caused him to be in the most trouble.

If his sister had not gone to the dirt-bags, he would not have been made to go to court in Portumna. He would not have had to run away to England. He would not now have the guards chasing

him, along with the British police. He had a similar problem now with Imelda Riney and her son.


Imelda insisted that they stop walking, that her son was tired, and that she was too tired to carry him any more. He continued to argue with her, insisting that she keep walking. He had the
gun pointed at her and when she turned towards him, he would point it at her chest.

He was trying not to shout for fear of being heard and was constantly looking around as if expecting guards to move in at any time. He told her that she had to keep walking.

Suddenly, she stopped and told him that she would not go any further. She lunged at the gun pointed at her chest. He heard the shot and saw her thrown backwards to the ground. He looked at
her for a while as if not sure what had happened. Then he saw her left eye where the bullet had entered her head. She was lying very still. He knew that she was dead.

Liam was standing close by and to Brendan’s left. He was confused and frightened by the shot. He saw that there was something wrong with his mother and Brendan brought him over to her
body.

Liam leaned over to look at his mother’s face. He was calling her name. Brendan looked at the child’s back and the dead body of the mother. He could not let the child live without his mother. He
could not keep a witness to what had happened. He could not travel with the child.

He quietly removed the spent shell from the gun and put it in his pocket. He reloaded the gun, not wanting the child to look around and see what was about to happen.

He moved quietly towards the child who was still leaning over his mother. He fired a shot from very close range and watched Liam fall over on top of his mother and become very still.

He again removed the shell, put it in his pocket, and reloaded.

Brendan now had to act quickly. His own survival was now the only important thing. Getting to France would have to be postponed.

Hiding was all that mattered. He gathered up some branches and threw them over the bodies. There was silence everywhere. The quietness made him more aware of the thoughts flying
around in his head.

He could hear his every move. He sometimes felt he could hear his thoughts talking back to him.

He knew that he had to leave Cregg Forest quickly. It no longer offered safety. It now offered only more danger. He could not remain close to the bodies.

None of his belongings, which were about a quarter of a mile away in another part of the wood, could be left this close to the bodies. The car could not be left nearby. The search would begin
where the car was found. It had to be taken some distance from the bodies to put the searchers on the wrong trail.

Imelda and Liam had last been seen with him throughout the day and they had been seen with him by one person who knew him well — Mae Tuohy.

Val Ballance would be returning shortly with Oisin from school. He would wonder where Imelda was and where she had taken Liam. He might ask questions very soon and get a search started.

If he did, Mae Tuohy would remember what she had seen and tell the guards what she suspected.

He rushed back towards the road where the car was parked. The keys had been left in the ignition. He got into the car, started it, and began driving deeper into the wood along the main forest
road. He would wait until dark before getting his tent and belongings.

Brendan found a safe place. He was tired and sleepy but his thoughts would not stop racing. He sometimes slept a dazed sleep as if everything was unreal. He tried to do what he had practised
all of his life. He used his imagination to control fear.

He tried to stop feeling for Imelda Riney and Liam. He found that he could block out feelings and act as if something painful hadn’t happened. This was now more of a struggle. It had become
harder over the years.

The images, no matter how hard he tried, kept crowding in. This could be dangerous. He had to keep thinking, planning. He had to stop the images. He had to have plans. He had to keep

moving.


Through the turmoil in his mind, some plans were forming. He always felt safe with his grandmother in Eyrecourt. She would help him, give him a place to stay, hide him, give him food, and
give him clean clothing. He had to have clean clothing.

He would have to put his belongings in a safe place. He had to get rid of the car. When found, it would have to be free of all signs that he had ever been in it. And, above all else, it would have to
be far away from the bodies.

When it was dark, he drove carefully to near where his tent and belongings were. He retrieved them, moving very quickly. He drove to where he could safely make a phone call, then called a
friend and arranged to have him hold his belongings. The meeting and transfer were arranged very carefully.

Brendan knew that every minute in the car meant danger. He drove out a back road from the forest and through Woodford near Loughrea. He tried to remove the licence plates but he could not
get them off. He finally got the front one off and threw it into a field.

He found an entrance to a forest and drove in. He got some petrol out of the tank and spilled it all over the interior of the car, lit a match and hoped that the flames and smoke would not be seen
until the car was destroyed.

When he was sure that the car would be destroyed by the fire, Brendan began walking in the direction of his grandmother’s house in Eyrecourt. He kept the gun hidden under his coat and
made sure to carry the bag with the ammunition safely.

He had decided that if he were accosted by the guards, he would not be taken alive. He had enough ammunition to hold off an attack for a long time. He had counted the rounds several times.
There were seventy or eighty rounds left.

He would have to concentrate on reloading quickly after each shot if he were in a shoot-out. He wouldn’t mind dying in a shoot-out. He would master one kind of fear, the fear of dying. He

would have the satisfaction of seeing others experience the fear he had felt all of his life.