Chapter 17

The Killing of Fr Joseph Walsh — A Reconstruction

JJ Muggivan

On Tuesday night, Brendan knew that he had to do something desperate in order to escape from Eyrecourt. He needed transportation. He had heard that the news was out that they
were searching for Imelda and Liam Riney. He knew it wouldn’t be long before the guards were told they had last been seen with him — and in her car. While the bodies were missing he had time to act.

He felt unable to wait any longer for the guards to come to his grandmother’s house and start the shoot-out. He was getting increasingly nervous, and decided to force the priest,
who lived a short distance away, to help him.

He decided to break into the priest’s house, rob him and take his car. He would have to find a way to convince Fr Walsh not to raise the alarm until he was safely out of Eyrecourt.
Brendan watched until he saw Fr Walsh drive up. When he thought it was safe, he entered the house by the bathroom window, bringing the loaded .22 rifle with him. He left the bag with the
ammunition outside.

No sooner was he inside, or part of the way in, than he found himself face to face with Fr Walsh. The priest asked him what he was doing. At first, Brendan was almost incoherent. He finally
told Fr Walsh what he must do.

As the confrontation developed, Brendan became confused at Fr Walsh’s reaction. The priest didn’t appear frightened no matter how seriously Brendan talked.
Fr Walsh had heard about the missing mother and child and asked Brendan if he had had anything to do with them. He could tell by Brendan’s reaction that he had hit a nerve and that he knew
something.

Fr Walsh then told Brendan that he would not help him in any way until he told him where the missing people were. Brendan told him a story that he would continue using for the next several
days.

He said that Imelda and Liam Riney were alive but were being held by another crowd in the Mountshannon-Whitegate area. Fr Walsh pushed him to tell him where he thought they were being
held.


Brendan in desperation told the priest that they would be released safely at a later date. Fr Walsh said that he didn’t believe this. Finally, Fr Walsh told Brendan he would help only if Brendan
showed him where the missing people were being held.

Brendan now believed he had no choice and agreed to let Fr Walsh drive to Cregg Forest with him. He thought to himself that this would give him time to come up with a plan to get help from
Fr Walsh without having to turn himself in to the guards.

In order to I earn where the missing people were, Fr Walsh promised to help Brendan escape. Brendan agreed and both men got in the car to begin the drive to Cregg. The priest drove and Brendan was in the back seat with the gun. Before entering the car, he got his bag with the ammunition.

On the way, Fr Walsh tried to get as much information as he could from Brendan. Brendan was continuing to tell his story of the mother and child being held by another crowd. Fr Walsh did
not believe this story but continued the journey to where Brendan said the people were.

The priest knew that the mother and child had been missing for several days and thought that they must be hungry and cold.

As they drove towards Portumna, Brendan was trying to think of a way to get help from Fr Walsh and avoid going to Cregg. They drove into Portumna and turned right when they reached the
intersection of the Eyrecourt and Woodford roads.

To gain more time to think, Brendan told the priest to turn into a wood on the left-hand side of the road as they drove towards Woodford. Brendan wanted to avoid returning to where he had
left the bodies of the mother and child.

The gate was locked and Fr Walsh told Brendan he did not believe that the missing people were in this area. Brendan agreed and told the priest to drive towards Cregg.

As they approached Cregg, Fr Walsh saw that Brendan was getting more and more agitated and nervous. However, he was able to persuade Brendan to continue the journey by agreeing to go to
the bank in Banagher in the morning to get money for him to pay his way to France.

He promised not to raise any alarm until Brendan was safely away. He also promised to let Brendan have the car. All he wanted in return was to be able to free the mother and child and end
their family’s worries and suffering.

At Brendan’s direction, Fr Walsh turned right at Cregg Cross and drove into the forest. It was about 1 a.m. on Wednesday. Brendan was becoming more frightened at having to return to where
the bodies were. He was trying not to show his fear because he didn’t want the priest to suspect that the mother and child were dead.

He told Fr Walsh to turn left when they came to the secondary road where he had brought Imelda Riney and her son. When they were close to where he had entered the forest with the mother
and child, Brendan told Fr Walsh to get out of the car with him.

It was very dark and Brendan began arguing that they would be unable to find the missing people at night. The headlights of the car could help only at the periphery of the wood.

Brendan tried to convince Fr Walsh that searching at night was a waste of time, but the priest did not want to give up. Finally, Fr Walsh suggested staying in the car for the night and, at dawn,
making another attempt to go to where the people were. Fr Walsh had begun to suspect that the mother and child were not alive.

Brendan told Fr Walsh that they were close to a vacant house, Cregg House — the house where he was born. He told the priest to start driving out of the forest.

They got back into the car and left the forest. When they got to Cregg Cross, they took a right turn towards Cregg House. When they arrived at the entrance, Brendan got out and opened the
gate into the field where the house was located.

There were no fences on the lane leading up to the house. Brendan closed the gate and got back into the car. The priest drove up the lane to the house and parked the car.

They both entered the rear section of the house and began to wait for the morning. Brendan was becoming even more agitated and began talking a lot to the priest. Fr Walsh encouraged him to

keep talking and listened intently.


Brendan told him about his childhood, his mother, his incarcerations, his abuse, his stay with the Muggivans, his trips to England, and, in short, the story of his life. Several times, as Brendan
talked about his mother’s suicide attempts, and his own, he mentioned that he still wanted to die.

He put the gun in his mouth several times and talked about pulling the trigger and ending it all. He talked about the voices in his head that never seemed to stop. The priest persuaded him not
to kill himself and told him he could be forgiven for anything but maybe not for death by his own hand.

The vigil continued throughout the night until it began slowly to get bright around 6 a.m. on Wednesday 4 May 1994. When it was bright enough, Fr Walsh said that it was time to go into the
forest.

By now, Fr Walsh knew that they were looking for the bodies and that he would have to pray for them. He had the oils for the last rites in the car.

Both men left the house, with Brendan looking around carefully to make sure that there was no one nearby, especially squad cars. He was expecting guards to be searching. It was five days
since Imelda and Liam Riney had gone missing so the search would be intense.

They drove back to the main road and turned left towards Cregg Cross. They turned into the forest and left again, on the road where Brendan had brought Imelda and Liam. Fr Walsh was
driving.

They looked for an entrance to the forest where Brendan had entered with Imelda and Liam. They got out of the car several times. Brendan was getting increasingly worried that he wouldn’t be
able to find the entrance or the direction to the bodies. It was getting very bright and late in the morning.

Brendan finally thought he had found the point where he had entered with Imelda and Liam, and he and the priest walked into the wood through the trees.

He soon realised that they were not in the right place and that he would not be able to remember where to go. He began arguing with Fr Walsh that they were close enough to where the missing
persons were.

He told the priest that they could not stay any longer, that he had to get away. He was now shouting at Fr Walsh to take him immediately to Banagher to get the money he needed to go to
France.

The priest persisted in telling Brendan that they must continue searching until the mother and child were found.

Brendan suddenly told him that there was no hurry in finding them — they were dead. Fr Walsh pleaded that it wouldn’t be right to leave them without giving them the last rites and asked
Brendan please to continue with the search. But Brendan was in a hurry.

The priest knelt down in front of a rock and started saying the rosary. Brendan asked him to pray for Imelda Riney and Liam. As the priest said the rosary, Brendan thought to himself that he
intended to say the entire rosary and there certainly was no time for that — the guards might already be entering the forest. He needed the priest’s car.

Fr Walsh was kneeling with his back to Brendan. Brendan moved closer and pointed the gun at the back of the priest’s head, then pulled the trigger.

He ran back to the car, making sure to remove the shell casing from the gun and put it in his pocket. Finding the keys left in the car, he started the engine and drove in the direction the car was
facing, coming to a dead end.

He turned the car around and rushed from the forest, keeping an eye out for anyone who might witness him leaving. It was still early and there was little traffic on the road as he drove to
Portumna.

He blindly drove the route he had planned to drive with Imelda and Liam. He went to Portumna and across the Shannon into Tipperary. He was heading in the direction of Limerick but did not

want to go there, and slowly realised that he was driving around aimlessly.