Chapter 20

More Hostages

JJ Muggivan

At the trial, Fiona Sampson gave evidence of her experiences on the morning of 7 May 1994.

She was still in bed when, at 7.45, she heard glass breaking. She got up to investigate and saw a man with a gun coming into the kitchen through the back door. He had tights over
his face and was wearing a green jacket and dark clothing. Her first instinct was to go into a bedroom and close the door behind her, but she decided that there was no point in doing
that, and returned to the hallway, where she recognised the man as Brendan O’Donnell, whom she knew as an acquaintance because he lived locally and they had been to school

together.

They greeted each other and he told her he needed to get out of the area. They went into the kitchen together where he saw the car keys and asked her if she could drive. When she told him that
she could, he pointed the gun at her and she felt she had no choice. She asked if she could put on shoes and change her clothes because she was dressed only in a night dress, but he wouldn't allow
her to, insisting that they had to leave immediately.

Fiona drove away from the farm, with Brendan in the passenger seat, pointing the gun at her. They drove in the direction of Williamstown Pier, and Brendan complained that they weren’t
going fast enough. At one point, he asked her to stop, and he got out and into the back of the car, and then told her to continue driving. From time to time, he lifted the stocking from his face.

In the course of the journey, Fiona Sampson engaged Brendan in a number of conversations, at one stage discussing the relative merits of male and female drivers. She knew that Brendan was
being sought, and she asked him on three occasions about the disappearances of Imelda and Liam Riney and Fr Walsh. He said that he knew where Imelda and Liam were and that they were safe,
although he hadn’t seen them since he had got a lift from Imelda the previous Friday week. He denied any knowledge of Fr Walsh but was worried that he would be connected with the disappearance.

Brendan told Fiona that he had slept out the previous night and hadn’t eaten in days. He said that he wouldn’t kill or rape her and that she could go as soon as he was out of the area. However, at
another stage in the journey, he told her that he would kill her if he had to, as he had nothing to lose by it, but that it would be quick. She told him that she wasn’t prepared to die yet.

Having found a denim jacket in the back of the car, Brendan passed it to Fiona to put on, telling her to keep driving while she was doing so. However, she lost control of the car which went into

a spin and off the road. Brendan was angry and accused her of crashing it deliberately, but she told him that if she had planned to crash the car, she would have done it on the main road.


Neither Fiona nor Brendan succeeded in getting the car back onto the road, and Brendan attempted to set fire to it, telling Fiona that he would get a bigger one. He then ordered her to set off on
foot with him across bog and rough terrain. She was now wearing the denim jacket and her mother’s coat which had also been in the car, but she was still barefoot.

There was a helicopter above as they left the car, and Brendan told her to turn the coat inside out, explaining that the dark green lining would be less obvious than the outer purple colour. He
asked her what height she was and wanted to know if she had any metal on her. He said that the helicopter would have an infra-red scan which would be able to detect metal from a distance and
that it would also have long-range guns which would not be able to tell the difference between them.

Fiona’s thighs were badly scratched and there were stones and thorns in her feet. At one point, Brendan stopped to inspect the soles of her feet for blood, explaining that if there were dogs out
after him, they would pick up the scent.

There was a car outside a house they came to, but Brendan said that it was too old and wouldn’t move fast enough. At another house, the owner was standing at an upstairs window with a gun
and ordered them off his property and fired a shot in the air. Brendan threatened to come back or to send someone else back to get the man.

At another house, the owner was inside, drinking tea. When they went to the window, he told them that he had no car. Brendan checked the sheds but, finding no car, left. Still on foot, they
headed off in the direction of Woodford.

When Brendan saw a navy Golf car approaching them, he flagged it down and ordered the driver at gunpoint to let them in. Fiona was forced to get into the back with Brendan. Her memory
after that was vague but she remembered Brendan telling the man to drive down the road and turn, and that he had the gun pointing towards the front of the car. She noticed people with guns
coming towards the car and said she heard a shot being fired and saw the barrel of the gun being shoved from left to right.

There was a lot of activity, and Brendan was arrested. Fiona was lifted by guards from the back of the car.

eH

Fiona Sampson’s testimony provided a remarkable account of a desperate man, on the run and willing to engage in any activity to avoid capture. She was led to believe that her abduction was

solely for the purpose of escaping the manhunt.

Her testimony, together with those of Eddie Cleary, Andreas Hannefield and Kevin Mooney provided substantial information about Brendan’s state of mind as he took and held hostages. Escaping from the guards appears to have been his sole motivation.

There are three instances in the entire saga of Brendan O’Donnell where we get to see him through the eyes of one of his hostages — that is, through the eyes of an abducted individual in danger of being killed.

The three instances are when he held his sister and nephew hostage, when he held Fiona Sampson hostage, and when he held Eddie Cleary hostage. Three hostages died and four survived.

Only one of these instances was clearly inspired by a paranoid belief — namely, the holding of Ann Marie hostage. Brendan had the delusional belief that his sister was planning to put poison
in his milk.

However, this action, occurring out of a paranoid belief, set in motion the chain of events that led to his going on the run from the Garda Siochana in Ireland and the police in England. His goal,
after the assault on his sister, was to run from imprisonment, which was a real danger. His early imprisonment had involved painful events, one of which was probably rape.

Brendan’s abduction of Fiona Sampson and Eddie Cleary, and his attempted taking of cars from Andreas Hannefield and Kevin Mooney, were inspired purely by his need to escape the real —
not imagined — danger of being captured again and imprisoned. Killing any of these four individuals would have been done mainly to facilitate escape.

In the past, Brendan would simply have stolen these people’s cars, but the circumstances were different now. There was greater urgency and he believed that pursuit by police was imminent.


Taking Imelda Riney’s car, even if he could have robbed the post office by himself, would have carried the risk of Imelda’s calling the police as soon as he had left her house. In other words, his
hostages became dangerous to him. Brendan Muggivan discovered early that Brendan O’Donnell had learned at a young age to destroy or hide evidence of his wrongdoing.

Was killing ever a primary motivation for what Brendan did? Could he have been planning to take Imelda Riney and Liam deep into Cregg Forest and leave them there in the hope that they
wouldn’t be able to find their way out — or to the guards — until he was safely out of the area?

Once the theory that the abductions were not motivated for the satisfaction of committing cold-blooded killings is left out of the picture, Brendan O’Donnell’s behaviour begins to make more
sense.

I believe that the abduction of Imelda Riney and Liam, and the abduction of Fr Walsh, were for the same purposes as the abductions of Fiona Sampson and Eddie Cleary.

After the bodies had been found, Tony Muggivan told a friend of his, Bridget (B. Mae) Dinan, what had happened. When she heard the account, she said to Tony, ‘Sure the craytur wouldn’t have
done it if he could stop himself.’ He was known to have been out of control of himself for a long time.

The testimony of Fiona Sampson, Eddie Cleary, Andreas Hannefield and Kevin Mooney made it virtually impossible for Brendan’s legal defence team to sustain a defence of not guilty by reason
of the kind of insanity associated with Hebephrenic or Disorganized Schizophrenia.

Delusional Disorder, Paranoid Type, untreated can be a devastating mental-health disorder, but it can also be a deceptive disorder as an individual can frequently appear very rational and normal. Brendan ranged back and forth between the florid symptoms of the disorder and a deceptive appearance of normality.

He was acting on a paranoid belief when he took his sister hostage. When she survived, he was in danger, and the danger presented itself immediately — she went to the guards, he was arrested, hospitalised briefly, released from hospital, and charged with a crime.

The chain of events leading to these tragedies started with his having acted on a paranoid belief. This chain of events ended with a real — and ‘rationally’ planned — struggle to escape what
was now a real danger.

This pattern was present throughout his life. He would engage in impulsive behaviour that would put him in conflict with police. If he did not receive help immediately to extricate himself
with a reasonable or rational solution, he would make matters worse.

Brendan’s experience of Tony having previously helped to extricate him from problems led him to attempt contact with Tony immediately before the abduction of Imelda Riney. Tony’s unavailability left him to his own devices.

And when left to his own devices he engaged in disastrous problem-solving. As he said to Tony after his capture, ‘I fucked up this time.’

eH

It was the morning of 7 May 1994. Andreas Hannefeld was at home on his farm in Woodford, County Galway. He and his wife had heard on the radio about the people who had disappeared. He
made sure that his shotgun was handy, and he told his family to go upstairs.

Andreas was keeping watch at the front window when he saw Brendan and Fiona coming towards the farm gate. He did not recognise them, and he dialled 999 to report what he had seen. He
watched as the strangers came through the fields, taking cover by the trees. It took them about five minutes to get as far as the second gate, at the house.

Brendan and Fiona stopped, and Andreas shouted from the upstairs window. ‘Fuck off, you stupid idiot,’ he roared.

Brendan replied that he only wanted a car, but Andreas told him that his wife had the keys and was not there, to which Brendan replied that if Andreas did not get the key, he would come back

later, or send somebody else back to kill him.


Andreas loaded his shotgun and fired a shot in the air, away from Brendan and Fiona.

Brendan became very agitated and shouted, ‘Fuck you, you English bastard or whatever you are.’ Then he and Fiona left. Andreas again phoned the guards.

Kevin Mooney lived about half a mile from the Hannefelds. At about 9.30 a.m., he saw Brendan and Fiona outside his house. He did not know them, and he locked the door.

Brendan asked if he had a car and he told him he did not. Brendan put a rifle to the window, but then went off towards Woodford.

Eddie Cleary was driving his car on a quiet country road near Woodford, when he turned a bend and was confronted by a man pointing a gun at him. There was a girl beside him.

Brendan shouted at Eddie to stop the car or he would blow his head off. Eddie stopped the car and thought of reversing back down the road, but could tell from Brendan’s mood that he would
shoot him dead if he tried that.

Brendan asked Eddie if he was ‘a cop’. Eddie assured him that he was not and appealed to him not to shoot anyone. Brendan, who was holding the gun to Fiona’s shoulder, tried to open the car
door but they were all locked.

Eddie got out of the car and saw a garda car behind and guards in the ditch beside the road.

One of the guards shouted, ‘Give up, O’Donnell. You’re surrounded’ and a warning shot was fired.

Putting the gun to Fiona’s head, Brendan shouted at the guards, ‘Back off to fuck now or I'll blow her fucking head off!’ Then he pushed Fiona into the back of the car and got in beside her. He
told Eddie to drive.

With the gun to the back of his head, Eddie drove a few yards. There were more garda cars in front of them and the road was blocked. Brendan told him to turn the car, but as Eddie did so, he
manoeuvred badly to give the guards a chance to reach them.

Brendan, who was very agitated and shouting at Eddie to ‘turn the fucking car’, fired a shot through the roof. Eddie could see that the guards were beside the car at this stage. He grabbed the
barrel of the gun and held it for a few moments, then he pulled the gun from Brendan and put it in the passenger seat beside him.

A guard came up to the window beside Fiona and she unlocked the door. He lifted her out. Eddie would testify at the trial that Fiona was ‘terribly distressed’ at this point, and in a ‘shocking
condition.’ He would also recall that when Brendan was lying on the ground, his words were ‘I’m fucked now.’

Throughout his ordeal, Eddie Cleary expected that Brendan might shoot him at any moment.